Participants: Mathis, Théo, Kenji, Kathrin


# Multisorted: concrete syntax & parameterized syntax

In the parameterized syntax, encoding which sorts variables & which sorts occur in other sorts is difficult. Solution which seems to work:

- parameterized syntax has variables at every sort + complete vectors of substitutions/renamings (i.e. we don't care about which sorts occur in which).
- concrete syntax is what the user wants (e.g. not all sorts have variables).

Predicates on parameterized syntax: 
  wf : term -> Prop
  wf_subst : sort -> subst_vec -> Prop
which rule out impossible cases

Evaluation (parameterized syntax -> concrete syntax) is guarded by a wf hypothesis:
  eval : forall t : term, wf t -> concrete_term

After simplifying a term (with explicit substitutions), we build a proof of `wf t` on the fly (the proof follows the structure of `t` and can be built efficiently).

Note for Kenji: ideally `wf` lives in SProp, but support for SProp in Rocq is still pretty mediocre e.g:
- Equations (depelim) doesn't work with SProp
- until we have a sortpoly prelude, I have to redefine all standard constants such as True or False and logical connectives 
So it's not clear whether using SProp has more upsides than downsides.


# Multisorted: explicit syntax

Issue: how to encode a (complete) vector of substitutions?

For parameterized syntax we use the encoding:
  Inductive vec : forall n, (fin n -> Type) -> Type :=
  | vnil {T} : vec 0 T
  | vcons {n T} : T finO -> vec n (fun i => T (finS i)) -> vec (S n) T.
which works nicely.

For explicit syntax, all simple encodings we tried have issues:

1. subst_vec := forall sort : fin nsort, subst sort

sv := fun sort => ...
sv' := fun sort => simpl (...)

Easy to work with but doesn't compute the way we want (when simplifying terms/substitutions).

2. Inductive vec : forall n, (fin n -> Type) -> Type :=
   | vnil {T} : vec 0 T
   | vcons {n T} : T finO -> vec n (fun i => T (finS i)) -> vec (S n) T.

Inductive term : fin nsort -> Type :=
...
| T_subst {s} : vec nsort subst -> term s -> term s

with subst : fin nsort -> Type :=
| S_comp {s} : subst s -> vec nsort subst -> subst s
| ... 

with subst_vec : nat -> Type :=
| nil : subst_vec 0
| cons n : subst (finO : fin (S n)) -> subst_vec n -> subst_vec (S n) 

(* finO : fin nsort
   subst : fin nsort -> Type *) 

Easy to work with but doesn't satisfy Rocq's positivity condition (terms and substitutions are mutually defined inductives)

3. ... and other encodings (require transports / don't nest / don't compute well)

Théo found a more complex encoding that probably works:
  Inductive vec {n} {T : fin n → Type} : nat → Type :=
  | vnil : vec 0
  | vcons k (v : vec k) f : fin_nth n k f → T f → vec (S k).
but working with this seems painful (someone else than me will have to do it).


# Functors

Try to find a generic mechanism to handle functors in the signature (e.g. list/option).
TLDR: almost works, but some issues I haven't solved yet

In the signature, add a notion of functor:
  (** Argument types over a set of base types and a set of functors. *)
  Inductive arg_ty {base fctor} :=
  | AT_base : base -> arg_ty
  | AT_term : arg_ty
  | AT_bind : arg_ty -> arg_ty
  | AT_fctor : fctor -> arg_ty -> arg_ty.

In the parameterized & explicit syntax, add a term constructor for a functor applied to a vector of terms:
  Inductive term :=
  | ...
  (*| E_functor (F : Type -> Type) : F term -> term*)
  | E_afunctor f (sh : fctor_shape f) : vec term (fctor_size f sh) -> term

We encode a functor F : Type -> Type using an encoding close to W-types. An element of `F A` is represented by:
- a shape `sh : fctor_shape F`
- a size `n := fctor_size F sh` which depends on the shape
- a vector of elements `vec A (fctor_size F sh)`

E.g. a list `l : list A` is represented by:
- a shape `sh : nat` which is `List.length l`
- a size, which is also the length of the list
- a vector of elements `vec A (List.length l)`

(if the functor contains other info than simply elements of type `A`, for instance a bool or a string, they are stored in the shape `sh : fctor_shape F`).

This encoding is enough for many functors such as options/lists/trees which contain _finitely many_ occurences of `A`.
Example of functor on which it doesn't work nicely:
- `fin n -> A` only works if the user is willing to use functional extensionality (I think it's ok).
- `nat -> A` can't be encoded this way.
  I don't think we can find an encoding which works for these kinds of functors: there is no hope to simplify terms under a Rocq binder. 


# What works and what doesn't

Adding functors to parameterized syntax & explicit syntax works well. 


For concrete syntax it is harder: the issue is I don't have a nice induction principle on concrete terms, and trying to write one leads me down a rabbit hole:

- concrete terms can contain arbitrary functors `F` (e.g. `F := list`), but all I know about `F` is how to encode an element `x : F A` into a vector `v : vec A n`

- in particular I don't know if the elements of `v` are subterms of `x`.

- I though about doing induction on terms based on their size, where 
    size : term -> nat
    size (Var i) := 0
    size (app t ts) := size t + sum (encode_vector (map size ts)) 
  but then I get into transport issues...




